---
layout: post
title:  "Sick Day"
categories: food
---
I’m currently laying in bed, drinking my camomile tea while surrounded by used tissues. It’s only 8pm and I’ve already taken a 2 hour nap since getting home from work at 5:30pm. And I’m pretty sure I scared away all of my patients that I saw today from all of the sneezing.

That’s right, you guessed it – I’ve got a big, fat, ol’ cold.

Just when I started getting cocky, thinking about how it’s been so long since I’ve gotten sick, bragging to my friends about how good I am at fighting off illness… I’m pretty sure this is just the slap in the face my health-ego needed.

Ironically, I was just asked this week to be interviewed on the roll of diet in immune function for our organization’s blog. While I was compiling some resources and analyzing research, I started thinking back to my college years in sunny, supplement-crazy California…

What do you do at the first sign of a cold? Take Emergen-C. Man, that grainy, pink (raspberry flavor – because you needed some extra zing to be able to tolerate it), fizzy powder was everyone’s savior. We even used it as a chaser for our pre-game drinks, because if you’re going to damage your liver, you might at well make sure you don’t get scurvy in the process. I used to carry those packets around in my purse, and when I moved to Illinois for grad school, my roommates used to give me so much shit for drinking it.

While I won’t get fully into a discussion on supplements today (perhaps in the future…), I do want to talk about some nutrients that can help your body to function properly, and yes, even fight off illness or disease.

**FUN FACT:** 70% of your body’s immune system lies in your gut (aka GI tract aka small and large intestines).

What makes a happy gut?

1. **Probiotics.** Ever heard about your “gut microbiome?” Crazy interesting stuff. We don’t even know half of what there is to know about the bacteria that reside in our intestines. We do know, however, that good bacteria (probiotics) are found in individuals who tend to be healthier – have less severe diseases, maintain a healthy weight, etc – than those who have less good bacteria. Which probiotics are most helpful at improving immune health? Good question. There are literally billions of strands of bacteria that reside in our intestines. Species that have been studied in more detail include the bifidobacterium, lactobacillus, and clostridium varieties, although I believe research in this realm is going to explode in the next couple of years. Recommendations? Eat fermented foods (yogurt, kefir, kimchi) regularly. The fermentation process in these items produces probiotics as a byproduct, which your body can use.
2. **Fiber.** What do probiotics eat? Prebiotics (aka certain types of fiber like inulin). Probiotics (likes humans) are unhappy (and can die) if they don’t eat, so please feed them. There’s also overwhelming research on the benefits of fiber intake, so be good to yourself and eat some damn fruits and vegetables (start with 5 servings per day and drink plenty of water!). We also get fiber from whole grains, and studies show that increasing your intake of these foods is beneficial for your immune system (when you eat them instead of refined grains).
3. **Plant-based proteins.** When we eat protein, it gets broken down into amino acids in our bodies, which are the building blocks of most enzymes, hormones, and even antibodies. Antibodies fight disease and provide immunity to various diseases. Plant-based proteins are rich in not only amino acids, but also fiber and provide a double-whammy for immune protection.
4. **Antioxidants.** Conclusive research is out on certain nutrients, such as Vitamin C, but we do see that individuals who consume higher levels of antioxidants (Vitamins C and E, beta-carotene, selenium and manganese) tend to have higher immune protection, especially for diseases such as cancer and heart disease. Antioxidants work by helping to eliminate free radicals from the body, which can cause damage to cells. While no studies show that eating antioxidants and phytonutrients regularly and reverse disease, they may help to slow progression. Nevertheless, individuals who eat foods rich in these nutrients, such as berries, beans, nuts, and artichokes, appear to have lower rates of disease and tend to be healthier individuals in general.
5. **Zinc.** I throw this one in here for my Dad who loves his Zicam. There is some research that individuals who are zinc deficient appear to benefit in immune health by supplementing with zinc, however individuals who are not deficient rarely show benefits from supplementation.
6. **Anti-inflammatory foods.** Aside from fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and antioxidant-rich foods, focusing on food items that are considered “anti-inflammatory” may help your immune system to function at the top of its game. We are now starting to believe that many of the illnesses we face today are related to chronic inflammation in our bodies. Some foods that can help to reduce inflammation include herbs and spices (not salt. Especially: garlic, turmeric, and ginger), omega-3 fatty acids (think salmon, albacore tuna, flaxseeds, walnuts), dark chocolate (at least 70% cacao people, not Hershey’s), and red wine (yay!).
Take this all with a grain of salt (or cinnamon, hehe. It’s anti-inflammatory, get it?). Even though we can do everything in our power to prevent disease/infection, sometimes you’re going to get sick anyway. As Kanye West says, “that that don’t kill me can only make me stronger,” and that’s how I’m going to try to live my life.

So I’m off to bed for some R&R. Stay healthy, my friends.

xoxo

Susan
